# Gut Check : The Microbiome Game!

In *Gut Check : The Microbiome Game!* players compete to develop the
healthiest microbiome, while attempting to disrupt each others
efforts.

*"I'm going to raid the pharmacy, treat you with tetracycline, and
then give you a fungal infection"*

*"Oh yeah, I'm going to give you botulism"*

*"That's fine because I'm going to give myself a fecal transplant"*


##Game preparation

-Give one play sheet to each player, put the board in the center

-Remove all 6 "Checkup" cards (teal) from the deck

-Set all plasmid cards (purple) in a face-up pile as indicated on
 board

-Shuffle the remaining cards and give 5 to each player (if none are
microbes, that player may redraw)

-Deal 3 cards face up as indicated on board

-Shuffle the "*Checkup*" cards into the main deck

-The player who has most recently eaten yogurt goes first, play
proceeds clockwise The Short Version of the Rules (for people who
don't like to read)

-Play as many cards per turn as you'd like.

-You can only play one microbe per turn. Pathogens go in pathogen
zone, Beneficials go in beneficial zone, Opportunistics go in
either. You can play microbes on any player.

-Once per turn you can discard a card and take one of the face-up
 cards from the middle

-At the end of your turn, draw back up to 5 cards

-When a "*Checkup*" event is drawn everyone scores their microbiome,
 points are indicated on the cards depending on which zone the microbe
 is in.

-If someone plays an "*Antibiotic*" card, then read the rules below
 called "Plasmids"

-The game ends when the last card is drawn. Each other player gets a
final turn and then there is a final Checkup. Player with the most
health wins.

-Enjoy!

## The Actual Rules

### Card Types

There are three types of cards in the main deck; Microbes, Events, and Infections.

-Microbes (Orange): These represent bacteria that you are using to
either make a healthier microbiome for yourself, or to disrupt your
opponents microbiome(s). See the "Main Phase" rules for playing
Microbes.

-Events (Pink): These cards are played, their effect is resolved, and
they are discarded.  Some of them increase or decrease a player's
health. These effects are indicated in the green and red circles on
the card and occur instantly. You can play events for no effect, but
only if there is a valid target (e.g. "*Milk*" can be played even it
has no effect, but "*Lateral Gene Transfer*" can only be played if a
plasmid is in play)

-Infections (Yellow): Infections are played on a player and remain in
play until the conditions described on the card are fulfilled. They
are not considered Microbes and are therefore immune to cards such as
"*Bacteriophage therapy*" and the various antibiotics.  They are
scored during checkups, similar to Microbes.


### Turn order

1. **Main phase** During your main phase you can play as many cards as
you want, with the exception of Microbes. You can only play one
Microbe per turn (either on yourself or another player).  You can
never play cards during another players turn. Cards can be played in
any order you'd like.
 
  - *Playing a Microbe* : Pathogen Microbes can only be played in the
Pathogen Zone.  Beneficial Microbes can only be played in the
Beneficial Zone. Opportunistic Microbes can be played into either
zone. Note that you can play a microbe on yourself, or on an opponent.

  - *Exchange (Optional)* : Discard one card and draw one of the face
up cards. You may only do this once per turn but it can happen at any
point during the main phase.  Replace the missing card with the top
card of the deck.

2. Draw back to 5 cards

3. Turn ends

### Checkup Event (teal) 

When a *"Checkup"* card is drawn, immediately stop play and resolve
the checkup. After the checkup is resolved, place the "*Checkup*" card
to the side and draw another card to replace it. Keep the discarded
checkup cards in their own pile so players know how many are left
(there are 6). Cards that search though the library
(e.g. "*Probiotics*" and "Raid the pharmacy" do not trigger checkups).

During a checkup, you score your microbiome. Microbes in your
beneficial zone give points as indicated in the green circles on the
card. Microbes in your pathogen zone subtract points as indicated in
the red circles on the card. Infections are also scored at this
time. All cards (except for the checkup) remain in play after scoring.

There can never be two checkups in the same turn, if a second one is
drawn then shuffle it back into the deck. In addition, there cannot be
a checkup until every player has had a turn.

There is a 7th, automatic, checkup at the very end of the game that is
not represented by a card.


### Plasmids

Every time antibiotics are played, all surviving microbes of the
player receiving the antibiotics get an appropriate plasmid
(e.g. after tetracycline is played, the remaining microbes receive the
"*Tetracycline resistance plasmid*"). If no plasmids of the
appropriate type are available, nothing happens. This effect does not
occur for microbes which were already resistant to that
antibiotic. When a microbe carrying plasmids is destroyed, put its
plasmids back into the plasmid pile.  Tracking Health Various events
during the game, including checkups, cause the players health status
to go up or down as indicated on the player sheets. All players start
at 10 health. If a player's health ever reaches zero health, they are
out of the game and all their cards in play and hand are discarded.

### Game End

The game ends after the deck has been exhausted. The player who draws
the last card finishes their turn, then each other player gets one
final turn. This is followed by a final checkup. The player with the
highest health after the final checkup is the winner. It is also
possible to win if all other players are dead.

## Rules for 5-6 players

When playing with 5 or 6 players there are a couple of small changes
to the rules.  Instead of 6 "Checkup" cards, play with only 3, but
cycle through the deck twice. There will be 3 random checkups, then an
instantaneous midpoint checkup when the deck is exhausted for the
first time. Reshuffle the deck, again with 3 "Checkup" cards, then
continue play. Game end is as the same for 2-4 players (e.g. every
player gets a final turn before the game-ending checkup).


### Tips on Strategy (not needed to play the game)

Don't forget to exchange cards through the middle. Think not only of
cards that would benefit you but take negative cards that you don't
want to see played on you, or positive cards that might help your
opponents.

Card cycling (i.e. playing cards for no effect... such as "Milk" when
you have nothing to digest it) can be very useful. If you're doing
well, it's potentially worth cycling as much as possible to increase
the chances of drawing a checkup. If you're doing poorly, you might
need to hold back from playing many cards to lower the risk of drawing
a checkup.

The game plays very differently depending on the number of players. A
good strategy with 2 players may not work with 4 and vice versa.


## Notes on Microbiology

An attempt has been made to be as scientifically accurate as possible,
within the (significant) constraints of making a playable game. The
core concepts of the game, e.g.  antibiotic resistance, lateral gene
transfer, opportunistic microbes etc. are all derived from current
knowledge.

However, the real world of the human microbiome is significantly
messier than it might appear from this game. Important caveats include
the fact that in reality we know relatively little about our own
microbiome. It's clear that having a healthy microbiome is important,
but much less clear is how to measure that, what species that might
involve, how it is influenced by diet/culture/lifestyle etc.

Likewise, nutrition in real life is much murkier than here. While we
know that microbes in the gut produce certain vitamins we're often not
sure which ones. Likewise it's also unlikely that a single microbe
could be responsible for the ability to digest milk, grains, or plants
for example... but certainly our total microbiome is intimately
involved in these processes.









# Gut Check : The Microbiome Game

Defend your health with the help of your microbial community!

A game by David Coil, Jonathan Eisen, and Russell Neches

Design [inspired](http://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/47924/creating-playing-cards-using-tikz) by Stackexchange user Tom Bombadil.
ï»¿

## Rules

*These rules are provisional, and subject to change.*

In the microbiome game players compete to develop the healthiest microbiome, while attempting to disrupt each others efforts.

### Game preparation

 * Shuffle the deck and give 5 cards and one player sheet to each player
 * Deal 3 cards face up in the center of the table
 * The player who has most recently eaten yogurt goes first

### Turn order

1. **Exchange (Optional)** Discard one card and draw one of the face up cards.  You may only do this once per turn.   Replace the missing card with the top card of the deck.
2. **Main Phase** You can only play one Microbe per turn (either on yourself or another player).  During the main phase you can play any number of non-Microbe cards.  You can never play cards during another players turn.
  * *Playing a Microbe*:  Pathogen Microbes can only be played in the Pathogen Zone.  Beneficial Microbes can only be played in the Beneficial Zone.  Opportunistic Microbes can be played into either zone.  Note that you can play a microbe on yourself, or on an opponent.
3. **Scoring** After your main phase is complete, you score your microbiome.  Microbes in your beneficial zone give points as indicated in the green circles on the card.   Microbes in your pathogen zone subtract points as indicated in the red circles on the card.
4. **Draw back to 5 cards**
5. **Turn ends**

### Card Types

There are four types of cards; Microbes, Events, Plasmids, and Infections.

 * **Microbes (Orange)**:  These represent (so far) bacteria that you are using to either make a healthier microbiome for yourself, or to disrupt your opponents microbiome(s).  See the "Main Phase" rules for playing Microbes.
 * **Events (Pink)**:  These cards are played, their effect is resolved, and they are discarded.  Some of them increase or decrease a player's health.  These effects are indicated in the green and red circles on the card.
 * **Plasmids (Blue)**:  These must be played onto Microbes and they stay in play unless the microbe carrying them is killed.  There are cards that can move them between microbes.
 * **Infections (Yellow)**:  Infections are played on a player and remain in play until the conditions described on the card are fulfilled.  The are not considered Microbes and are therefore immune to cards such as Bacteriophage therapy and the various antibiotics.
